Friday, December 29, 2000

Hacked up basic symbol table stuff, but will need to expand later to
cough up identifiers by `gc'-ing through live WMEs to find unused
ids. Left off while debugging preferences.


Thursday, December 28, 2000

Fixed the action struct's depth foo as described below.


Tuesday, December 26, 2000

Kludged my way through getting preference memory started. Need to fix
create_instantiation() to do bonafide `gensym'-ing. Maybe it's time to
make a real symbol table?

Also, I hard-coded the initialization of the action struct's `depth'
and `field' values when the rhs_value is a variable binding. That'll
need to move into the rule compilation. Maybe we can initialize with a
variable symbol, and then resolve when making the p-node?


Monday, December 25, 2000

Debugged a single-condition production. Now I'm bombing in a
production with two positive conditions. Gotta fix that.


Tuesday, December 19, 2000

I've got the basic stuff for alpha nodes, memory nodes, and positive
join nodes hooked up. I'm starting to go through debugging
|rete_add_wme()|, and am bombing out in the right-addition routine
because I'm not getting a binding for the `S1' stuff. Need to debug
that.


Tuesday, December 5, 2000

There's also starting to be a bit of redundant code, so a bit of
refactoring will probably be in order shortly.


Monday, December 4, 2000

The rete propogation stuff is buggy right now. The problem is that:

1) I'm just naively letting stuff meander down the net. This'll cause
instantiation nodes to get tickled more than once. I think I need to
make the tests more restrictive by default; esp. simple_test() should
return zero at the end?

2) (Maybe the same as 1, above) I need to be able to go out and check
working memory for values. When I see a WME in simple_test() that
doesn't have the same attribute as the node I'm looking at, I should
go out to working memory and see if there is any element that'll
satisfy my conditions, and only then propogate the stuff onward...

